---
layout: post
title:  "Heinrich Winters and the Palatine Immigrants of 1709"
date:   2019-04-06 
categories: genealogy palatines winters
---

![The Palatine Families of New York; Jones, Henry Z., 1985](/assets/jones/01.title.page.jpg  "The Palatine Families of New York")

![Map of settlements](/assets/jones/02.map-of-settlements.jpg  "Map of settlements")

![Table of Contents](/assets/jones/03.toc.jpg)

## The Palatines' Story

[01](/assets/jones/the-palatines-story.01.jpg) The background of the great
"Palatine" emigration of 1709 has been well-chronicled by such past scholars
as Julius Goebel,. Sr., Friedrich Kapp, Sanford H. Cobb, F. R. Diffenderffer,
and Specially Dr. Walter A. Knittle. By mainly utilizing state papers and
official government records found in major repositories and libraries in
Europe and America, these noted historians did fine work and broke new ground
to give us "the big picture" of this great exodus of Germans to the new world. 

My own fifteen year Palatine project, howeyer, has approached this same
subject-matter from more of a genealogical rather than an historical point of
view (although, of course, both go hand in hand). I have studied the emigrants
themselves as much as the emigration, and thus have developed strong feelings
for the people involved as well as the events. The more I discover about the
Palatines from this personal perspective, the more my admiration and respect
for these courageous Germans grow, as I see how, after generations of
oppression and hardship, in 1709 they finally reached the limit of their
endurance and "took the risk" to find a better life in America. 

Excellent historical background material on the Palatines, largely unexplored
by previous researchers, has been found in the 17th and 18th century
churchbooks of the towns and villages where the emigrants resided. These old
registers are treasure-troves of data on the local level, for ever so often
the Pastors, after recording a baptism, marriage, or burial entry in their
church-books, would comment on important matters of the day affecting their
congregations. Their notations often were written with such poignancy that
they capture the spirit of the times and the flavor of life in the local
Palatine community better than any other sources I have seen. For example, the
churchbooks often reflect the devastation and havoc caused by the repetitive
wars fought, on German territory - a major factor leading to the 1709
emigration. The Pastor at Partenheim near Aizey wrote: 

    1635 after March: Shortly after this time, we were ruined and destroyed 
    throughout the land by the Swedish and Emperor's armies, so that we 
    could not come back again until the year 1637.

Some years later, the Pastor at **Westhofen** noted;

    1665: In the month of October, the by the Mainz-Lothringian invasion, 
    and the following children were baptised outside the area... 
    
    From October 1665 to 1669, this churchbook, along with my other best
    books, were taken to Worms for security... 

[02](/assets/jones/the-palatines-story.02.jpg) The plundering continued, as recorded by the as reported by the Pastor at **Kröffelbach**:

    On Friday 21 Dec 1688, a large French force came here to Cröffelbach, 
    plundered everything here and at Oberquembach, Oberwetz, Niederwetz,
    Reichskirchen [Reiskirchen] and other villages in the Wetterau,
    demanded a contribution, and left again for Cassel by Maintz [Castel near
    Mainz] and there crossed over the Rhine.  I took flight and, through God's
    help, escaped their hands.

One year later, the Pastor at **Ginsheim** echoed his colleague:

    Because-of the soldiers remaining se long in our land, with the French
    occupying the city of Mainz For two yrs., the German people have right to
    complain stout the [troop] movements back and forth in these parts: the
    Saxon and Bavarian armies are encamped in **Niederfeld** with 24,000 horse
    and foot [soldiers], the Hessians are on the other side of Mainz, and the
    Emperor's and [the] Lothringian troops are on the other side of tte Rhine
    below the city.

The churchbooks themselves sometimes did not survive, as noted by the Pastor at **Sprantal**:

    fl2e. in 16,.9: with the french invasion of Wirtem-rz =.7ery 2hurchbock - as well as baptism and 7:arriage record - net with misfortune, this new :r ==7- up by me, the duly calico Pastor -:er=, ant Ln 1- the beginning is shown in orderly ,,,en/inhabitants with their families 7 wives and ch.., the time of their oapt-i burials as later consecrated by .bsequentj Pastor at the death of ....._.cants] can easily set out and y without further research.  obvious from these contemporary, local accounts that 17C9-urs' fattiliea had been living for generations in an ,-_.J7t: with near-renr+ant wars, which made battlefields of :•wns, -and whole regions. .Aes being at the mercy -of invading armies, many of these uAro-'utsat-: "ierman^ were taxed unmercifully by whatever local. Princ n -4a4 jurlifeen over their particular geographic region, and by snA AFF,CY many poor Palatinea were bled dry finanCiallY by their Lords'. This was another reason for the exodus, as evidenced by a portion of a letter written back to Germany in 1749-by jOhannesi filer, an emigrant who finally nettled. in the Mohawk Valley of Solonial new York: 

to it ;till as rough [in Germany] as when we left [in 1709j? A far 43 we are concerned [in America], we are, Compared to taxes In Germany, a free country! We pay taxers once a year. These taxes are se minimal that soma apend more money for drinks in one evening When going to the pub. What the farmer farms is his own, shore are no tithes, ne tariffs, hunting and fishing 

